feat[ref arch] Update single cluster ref arch, improve workload to nodepool assignment and clarify high availability (#2652)
gitpod-io/website: gitpod/docs/self-hosted/latest/reference-architecture/_chunks/cluster.md

  import CloudPlatformToggle from "$lib/components/docs/cloud-platform-toggle.svelte";
</script>

The heart of this reference architecture is a **Kubernetes cluster** where all Gitpod components are deployed to. This cluster consists of three node pools:

1. **Services Node Pool**: The Gitpod “app” with all its services is deployed to these nodes. These services provide the users with the dashboard and manage the provisioning of workspaces.

> 2. **Regular Workspaces Node Pool**: Gitpod deploys the actual workspaces (where the actual developer work is happening) to these nodes. Because workspaces have vastly differing resource and security isolation requirements compared to Gitpod’s own services, they run on a dedicated node pool.
> 3. **Headless Workspace Node Pool**: Gitpod deploys the imagebuild and prebuild workspaces (where build work generally demands more CPU and disk). Because headless workspaces have vastly differing resource and security isolation requirements compared to Gitpod’s own services and regular workspaces, they run on a dedicated node pool.

Reviewer: **Opinion:** The comment regarding different resource and isolation requirements has some repetition, what do you think of this?

```suggestion
2. **Regular Workspaces Node Pool**: Gitpod deploys the actual workspaces (where the actual developer work is happening) to these nodes.
3. **Headless Workspace Node Pool**: Gitpod deploys the imagebuild and prebuild workspaces (where build work generally demands more CPU and disk) to these needs.

Gitpod services, imagebuilds, and regular workspaces have vastly differing resource and and isolation requirements. These workloads are separated onto different node pools to provide better quality of service and security guarantees.
```

Author: @adrienthebo :heart: thank you so much, that is much cleaner. Appreciate the suggestion!

| Max Nodes         | 50                                                                                  |
| Max Pods per Node | 110                                                                                 |
| Scopes            | `gke-default`,<br/>`https://www.googleapis.com/auth/ndev.clouddns.readwrite`        |
| Region            | Choose your [region and zones](https://cloud.google.com/compute/docs/regions-zones) |
| Node Labels       | `gitpod.io/workload_workspace_headless=true`                                        |

```bash
gcloud container node-pools \
    create "workload-headless-workspaces" \
    --cluster="${CLUSTER_NAME}" \
    --disk-type="pd-ssd" \
    --disk-size="512GB" \
    --image-type="UBUNTU_CONTAINERD" \
    --machine-type="n2d-standard-8" \
    --num-nodes=1 \
    --no-enable-autoupgrade \
    --enable-autorepair \
    --enable-autoscaling \
    --metadata disable-legacy-endpoints=true \
    --scopes="gke-default,https://www.googleapis.com/auth/ndev.clouddns.readwrite" \
    --node-labels="gitpod.io/workload_workspace_headless=true" \
    --max-pods-per-node=110 \

>     --min-nodes=1 \

Reviewer: **Thought:** There's interest in scaling nodegroups down to zero to save money in the off-hours, what happens when we set `--min-nodes=0`? This issue might be out of scope but we might have a chance to scoop up a quick win here.

Author: With the saas, we scale headless pools to zero, and some (but not all) workspace pools. That said, I lack the bandwidth to properly test this change in the context of this PR. Let's plan to include in a future iteration.

    labels:
      gitpod.io/workload_workspace_regular: "true"

    preBootstrapCommands:
      - echo "export USE_MAX_PODS=false" >> /etc/profile.d/bootstrap.sh
      - echo "export CONTAINER_RUNTIME=containerd" >> /etc/profile.d/bootstrap.sh
      - sed -i '/^set -o errexit/a\\nsource /etc/profile.d/bootstrap.sh' /etc/eks/bootstrap.sh
  - name: headless-workspaces
    amiFamily: Ubuntu2004
    spot: false
    instanceTypes: ["m6i.2xlarge"]
    desiredCapacity: 2
    minSize: 1
    maxSize: 50
    maxPodsPerNode: 110
    disableIMDSv1: false
    volumeSize: 512
    volumeType: gp3
    volumeIOPS: 6000
    volumeThroughput: 500
    ebsOptimized: true
    privateNetworking: true
    propagateASGTags: true

    iam:
      attachPolicyARNs:
        - arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/AmazonEC2ContainerRegistryReadOnly
        - arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/AmazonEKSWorkerNodePolicy
        - arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/AmazonEKS_CNI_Policy
        - arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/ElasticLoadBalancingFullAccess
        - arn:aws:iam::aws:policy/AmazonSSMManagedInstanceCore

>     tags:
>       k8s.io/cluster-autoscaler/enabled: "true"
>       k8s.io/cluster-autoscaler/gitpod: "owned"
> 
>     labels:
>       # Important - If you change the name of your EKS cluster from the
>       # default cluster name ("gitpod"), update the tag below to match
>       # your cluster (`k8s.io/cluster-autoscaler/<cluster-name>: "owned"`)
>       #
>       # For example: `k8s.io/cluster-autoscaler/gitpod-corp: "owned"`

Reviewer: **fixup:** The autoscaler tag comment got shifted down to the node labels, we want to ensure it's just above the autoscaler node tags.

```suggestion
    tags:
      k8s.io/cluster-autoscaler/enabled: "true"
      # Important - If you change the name of your EKS cluster from the
      # default cluster name ("gitpod"), update the tag below to match
      # your cluster (`k8s.io/cluster-autoscaler/<cluster-name>: "owned"`)
      #
      # For example: `k8s.io/cluster-autoscaler/gitpod-corp: "owned"`
      k8s.io/cluster-autoscaler/gitpod: "owned"

    labels:
```

```bash
kubectl get nodes -o=custom-columns="NAME:.metadata.name,\

> NODEGROUP:.metadata.labels.eks\.amazonaws\.com/nodegroup,\

Author: This way users can easily see which group their nodes belong to.  

For the future, it would be nice if we could change the node names to indicate their related pool (headless, regular), but, I'm not sure if that's possible with EKS. This way admins wouldn't have to do custom columns, and instead could do `-o wide` to get the related node group for a pod.

Reviewer: I checked into this and it looks non-trivial; adding the nodegroup to this report will work. We can potentially shave this yak for the reference architecture GA release (as it'll definitely improve the operator experience).
